Add OTEL_SDK_DISABLED env var to disable opentelemetry SDK. (#2679)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/sdk-environment-variables.md

| Name                     | Description                                       | Default                           | Notes                               |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. This will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics, and Logs. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK will remain enabled.|

Reviewer: Last week, there was a question about whether this setting impacts the configured propagators. I believe the answer is No and that it should be explicitly stated here.  Is the following correct?
```suggestion
| OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. This will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics, and Logs. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK will remain enabled. Note that this setting has no effect on propagators configured through the OTEL_PROPAGATORS variable.|
```

> | OTEL_SDK_DISABLED         | Disable the SDK for all signals | false | Boolean value. If "true", a no-op SDK implementation will be used for all telemetry signals. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK will remain enabled. This setting has no effect on propagators configured through the OTEL_PROPAGATORS variable.|

Reviewer 2: Is the no-op trace SDK implementation the same as the definition [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/2cfad37daf7e0d20851fd8a639a55375c3fc93dd/specification/trace/api.md#behavior-of-the-api-in-the-absence-of-an-installed-sdk)?

Note this no-op definition is different than an SDK tracer provider with the default configuration, which would include the [default random id generator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/2cfad37daf7e0d20851fd8a639a55375c3fc93dd/specification/trace/sdk.md#id-generators) and [default sampler](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/2cfad37daf7e0d20851fd8a639a55375c3fc93dd/specification/trace/sdk.md#sampling).

Author: Good point to clarify @jack-berg.
That spec mentions: "A TracerProvider could also return a no-op Tracer here if **application owners configure the SDK to suppress telemetry produced by this library**.". This seems to me the same behavior that we want to accomplish with this PR.
In relation to the default random generator and sampler... In practice, the id generator could be the default random, because it should't be used, if Span Processors are not set.
In relation to Sampler, I think the Sampler should discard all tracing data.
I think this reasoning can be applied for the other providers as well. 
I think the rationale in here should be to minimize the work done during runtime, in a safe way. Null implementations should probably be avoided.
What do you think of changing  the line:
"a no-op SDK implementation will be used for all telemetry signals."
by 
"a no-op SDK implementation will be used for all telemetry signals. No-op implementations should be null sabe and minimize the amount of work performed during runtime"

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. This will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics, and Logs. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK will remain enabled. This setting has no effect on propagators configured through the OTEL_PROPAGATORS variable.|

Reviewer 3: This should be defined as a disablement, rather than a enablement, and the generic terminology of "signals" should be used for future compatibility.

```suggestion
| OTEL_SDK_DISABLED         | Disable the SDK for all signals | false | If "true", a no-op SDK implementation will be used for all telemetry signals. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK will remain enabled. This setting has no effect on propagators configured through the OTEL_PROPAGATORS variable.|
```

As currently defined, a user will need to read this specification to determine what unset means. The "zero" value of booleans in many context is `false`, it is not clear in those context that default unset means `true`. Defining this as the positive action it will take, disabling, removes this ambiguity and will alleviate OpenTelemetry user confusion.

Author: OTEL_SDK_DISABLED has already been discussed and rejected, please read the previous comments. I will not modify the PR on this regard.

Author: Signals is too vage. When we mention processors is a concrete code construct that we can define as noop, not doing any work.

Reviewer 4: I also advocate of using `enabled` not `disabled` as the double negative might cause a lot of confusion. OTEL_SDK_ENABLED is a better name.

Reviewer 3: If [this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2679#discussion_r934693167) or [this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2679#discussion_r929769171) is the discussion you are referring to, then you are in correct in saying the points I'm raising here have already been discussed.

If you are talking about another conversation, then you are correct and I do not see it. Please provide a link if so.

In both instances you objected to two other reviewers feedback with unjustified reason. You stated that both having `true` as a default naturally makes the value optional and that having a positive value is "much less confusing." As I stated above:

> The "zero" value of booleans in many context is `false`, it is not clear in those context that default unset means `true`.

Therefore, like stated above,

> a user will need to read this specification to determine what unset means.

Having a default value of `true` is not "much less confusing", and I imagine many users will find it quite confusing. Furthermore, this confusion will extend to them not understanding if this option is indeed optional. If they think the default value of a boolean is `false` it is reasonable for them to think that they would need to explicitly set `OTEL_SDK_ENABLED=true` so their SDK is not disabled.

> I will not modify the PR on this regard.

I see this from above, it does not seem like you are willing to accept feedback on this issue when it was suggested by two other users. I would suggest closing the PR if this is truly the case, as I am unwilling to accept the changes as they are currently submitted.

Author: @MrAlias as stated before having OTEL_SDK_ENABLED=true be default or OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false be default are  logically exactly the same. One is the negation of the other. I've accepted many suggestions, as you can certainly verify by the commit record and the dozens of comments of this PR. 
Being the 2 expressions logically equivalent, the reason I'm inclined to the OTEL_SDK_ENABLED=true it's because I find non negated expressions clearer: 
if( OTEL_SDK_ENABLED){...} 
if( !OTEL_SDK_DISABLED) {...}
I think I'm being reasonable here but if you bloc the PR due to this minutia, I'm willing to bend to your will to make the PR pass.

Reviewer 3: I appreciate a developer might need to understand how to negate a false value if the variable is defined as such. It is something I considered in making the suggestion. I think it is reasonable and a common thing that OTel developers are able to do.

The reasons I gave to motivate the change promote the ease of use for the end-user. We need to prioritize this in the development of OTel (see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1113 for a prior example).

As you said, both options are logically equivalent. You can produce the same result with both. Therefore, since `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` removes user confusion it should be used.

Author: committed

| Name                     | Description                                       | Default                           | Notes                               |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | This deactivates all other properties |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activates/deactivates the SDK | true | This deactivates all other properties |
```

Reviewer 2: For description, how about `If false, disable the SDK`.

Reviewer 6: Instead of having an "enable" flag with a default of `true` we could also use `OTEL_SDK_DISABLE(D)` instead which disables it when set, WDYT?

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | This deactivates all other properties |

Reviewer 5: I think we should also add an entry for this variable in the compliance matrix: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/spec-compliance-matrix.md#environment-variables

Author: will do

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | This deactivates all other properties |

Reviewer 6: Please describe which possible values are defined.
One can assume that a value `false` disables the SDK and not `0` since the default is `true` but it should be clearly specified nevertheless.

Author: done

| OTEL_SERVICE_NAME        | Sets the value of the [`service.name`](./resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service) resource attribute | | If `service.name` is also provided in `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`, then `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME` takes precedence. |
| OTEL_LOG_LEVEL           | Log level used by the SDK logger                  | "info"                            |                                     |
| OTEL_PROPAGATORS         | Propagators to be used as a comma-separated list  | "tracecontext,baggage"            | Values MUST be deduplicated in order to register a `Propagator` only once. |
| OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER       | Sampler to be used for traces                     | "parentbased_always_on"                       | See [Sampling](./trace/sdk.md#sampling) |
| OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG   | String value to be used as the sampler argument   |                                   | The specified value will only be used if OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER is set. Each Sampler type defines its own expected input, if any. Invalid or unrecognized input MUST be logged and MUST be otherwise ignored, i.e. the SDK MUST behave as if OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG is not set.  |

> Setting `OTEL_SDK_ENABLED` to `"false"` will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics and Logs. Propagators will also be a Noop implementation (Equivalent to `OTEL_PROPAGATORS` to `"none"`).

Author: I has the same thought... But it's quite some text. Will see how it looks like

> Setting `OTEL_SDK_ENABLED` to `"false"` will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics and Logs. Propagators will also be a Noop implementation (Equivalent to `OTEL_PROPAGATORS` to `"none"`).

Author: Looks ok

| Name                     | Description                                       | Default                           | Notes                               |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. This will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics, and Logs. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect.|

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. This will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics, and Logs. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK will remain enabled.|
```

I'm not sure if just "will have no effect" is clear that the SDK will remain enabled as usual. Feel free to adopt this or not.

Author: will update

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. If "true" will enable the SDK.  <br/>If "false" will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics and Logs. Propagators will also be a Noop implementation (Equivalent to OTEL_PROPAGATORS to "none").                       |

Reviewer 6: Instead of having an "enable" flag with a default of `true` we could also use `OTEL_SDK_DISABLE(D)` instead, which disables it when set. It may feel a bit odd that the lack of the flag called `OTEL_SDK_ENABLED` will actually cause it to be enabled.
WDYT?

Author: I actually don't agree because OTEL_SDK_ENABLED has true as default meaning it's naturally optional. No need to set it anywhere. Also having a positive default value is much less confusing. 
Having OTEL_SDK_DISABLE false as default is exactly the same (it's a negation of the above), but more confusing because it has negative semantics.

Reviewer 5: Fair enough. I don't have a strong opinion on which is used.

Reviewer 7: FWIW the auto-instrumentations agents (I've checked the Java and .NET ones) seem to be using `*_ENABLED` way more often than `*_DISABLED`.

Author: mark as solved

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. If "true" will enable the SDK.  <br/>If "false" will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics and Logs. Propagators will also be a Noop implementation (Equivalent to OTEL_PROPAGATORS to "none").                       |

Reviewer 8: This document defines the behavior of Numeric, Enum and Duration type but not Boolean. I think we need a definition so that this new env variable is clear. For example what happens if a value other than "true" or "false" is used?

Author: In java, if it's not explicitly "true", it will be false. We can follow the same approach in here.

Author: We can also consider it as an enum with 2 possible values. "true" and "false", meaning if the value is not recognized we follow what we usually do... We throw an error.

Reviewer 6: Since disabling the (otherwise readily configured) SDK is rather the exception (at least for my understanding) I think we should have it fall back to "enabled" if in doubt.
I.e., it's enabled unless explicitly set to `OTEL_SDK_ENABLED=false` (or `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=true`).

Author: That's what's defined. It should be always enabled by default.

Author: If we chose boolean, how'd we define a new boolean datatype in the spec?

Reviewer 6: I think we could just say:
```suggestion
| OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. This will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics, and Logs. Propagators will also be a Noop implementation (Equivalent to OTEL_PROPAGATORS to "none"). Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect. |
```

Author: I Agree.

Reviewer 6: Given the discussion in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2679/files#r935041483 my suggestion would be:

```suggestion
| OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. This will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics, and Logs. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect. |
```

Author: done

Reviewer 6: Resolved in 0ff45a56bf597829cd927ebc9994ce7b3b0175d3.

> | OTEL_SDK_ENABLED         | Activate/deactivate the SDK | true | If "false", disable the SDK. If "true" will enable the SDK.  <br/>If "false" will configure Noop SDK implementation providers for Tracing, Metrics and Logs. Propagators will also be a Noop implementation (Equivalent to OTEL_PROPAGATORS to "none").                       |

Reviewer 9: Do we really need this option?  I'm wary of adding yet more environment-based configuration for increasingly niche use cases.

I also think that disabling propagation should not be coupled to this. The propagation system is part of the API and functions in the absence of an SDK.

Author: This is not just about propagation. It disables providers as well. 
In my view other languages might require this. There are some use cases driving this property:
* Make it easier for multi app containers to manage migrations from OpenTracing to OpenTelemetry tracing. 
* Allow deployments on multiple environments that might have or not observability capabilities without the need of repackaging.
* Some app and runtime environment migration use cases might benefit with the property.

Reviewer 9: > This is not just about propagation. It disables providers as well.

Understood.  My point is that the propagation system is not part of the SDK but the API and that disabling the SDK should not disable propagation.  Also, there is already a mechanism for disabling propagation via environment variable (for languages that support `OTEL_PROPAGATORS`).

Author: I understand and I don't agree. 
This is a master switch and, if implemented, must have priority over all other configs. I don't think it makes sense to have propagation if you don't want OpenTelemetry on.

Reviewer 6: I agree with @Aneurysm9. Disabling propagation can have unrelated side effects and break instrumentation "outside" of your app. It would break traces incoming from other OTel SDKs or any other instrumentation supporting W3C Trace Context.

Say you have three processes (A, B, C) with A calling B and B calling C. In each of them, only one single operation is instrumented, i.e., one span is produced each.

If all three of them are instrumented, your trace will look like this:

```
Trace id=foo:
Span id=A (no parent) ---> Span id=B (parent=A) ---> Span id=C (parent=B)
```

If you now disable the OTel SDK in B but leave the default propagators configured by the API in there, it will look like this (in languages with implicit context propagation):

```
Trace id=foo:
Span id=A (no parent) -----------------------------> Span id=C (parent=A)
```

There will not be any Span created for B, but since context propagation is still in place, the trace itself stays intact.

If you now disable propagators as well, however, it will break:

```
Trace id=foo:
Span id=A (no parent)

Trace id=bar:
                                                     Span id=C (no parent)
```

Your tracing backend will not be able to tell that A and C are related and show them in different traces.

If it would really be desired to not only disable the SDK in B but to also disable context propagation (and thus willingly break traces, if any), one can just set both the env var you propose along with `OTEL_PROPAGATORS=none` (which is supported in Java).

The env var will still disable the entire SDK but since it has SDK in the name I think it would be surprising if it would also change the default API behavior (w.r.t. context propagation).

Reviewer 6: Resolved in 0ff45a56bf597829cd927ebc9994ce7b3b0175d3.

Author: I agree propagators should not be affected by the property.
